identity: validate group settings (#425)
coreos/zincati: docs/usage/agent-identity.md

---
layout: default
parent: Usage
---

# Agent identity

> Zincati agent tries to derive an unique identity for the machine it is running on, by introspecting the underlying OS and reading user configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zincati agent tries to derive a unique identity for the machine it is running on by introspecting the underlying OS and reading user configuration.
```

Reviewer: `a` versus `an` for words like `unique` is admittedly a difference between American English and British English.

Author: I think I changed this at least three time before committing. Next time I'll just flip a coin and save some time ;)

This includes assigning an ID and a group label specific to the agent, so that cluster-wide upgrades can be orchestrated via [phased rollouts][phased] and [lock-based][fleetlock-strategy] reboots.

[phased]: auto-updates.md#phased-rollouts-client-wariness-canaries
[fleetlock-strategy]:  updates-strategy.md#lock-based-strategy

## Identity configuration

> All agent identity values are normally auto-detected at startup, and do not require user intervention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All agent identity values are normally auto-detected at startup and do not require user intervention.
```

However, the following settings can be overridden through configuration fragments in the `identity` section:
 * `group`: group label, used for graph fetching ([Cincinnati][cincinnati]) and reboot orchestration ([FleetLock][fleetlock])
 * `node_uuid`: agent ID, used for graph fetching ([Cincinnati][cincinnati]) and reboot orchestration ([FleetLock][fleetlock])
 * `rollout_wariness`: agent wariness to [phased rollouts][phased], used for graph fetching ([Cincinnati][cincinnati]).

> By default, the agent ID is automatically derived from `/etc/machine-id` in an application-specific way, group label is set to `default`, and rollout wariness is unset (Cincinnati backend will assign a dynamic value to each request).

Reviewer: Something like this may work a bit better.

```suggestion
The following are defaults for each setting:
- `group` (group label) is set to `default`
- `node_uuid` (agent ID) is automatically derived from `/etc/machine-id` in an application-specific way
- `rollout_wariness` is unset and the Cincinnati backend will assign a dynamic value to each request
```

---
layout: default
parent: Usage
---

> # Agent identity

Reviewer 2: This doc is great!

Zincati agent tries to derive a unique identity for the machine it is running on by introspecting the underlying OS and reading user configuration.
This includes assigning an ID and a group label specific to the agent, so that cluster-wide upgrades can be orchestrated via [phased rollouts][phased] and [lock-based][fleetlock-strategy] reboots.

[phased]: auto-updates.md#phased-rollouts-client-wariness-canaries
[fleetlock-strategy]:  updates-strategy.md#lock-based-strategy

## Identity configuration

All agent identity values are normally auto-detected at startup and do not require user intervention.

However, the following settings can be overridden through configuration fragments in the `identity` section:
 * `group`: group label, used for graph fetching ([Cincinnati][cincinnati]) and reboot orchestration ([FleetLock][fleetlock])
 * `node_uuid`: agent ID, used for graph fetching ([Cincinnati][cincinnati]) and reboot orchestration ([FleetLock][fleetlock])
 * `rollout_wariness`: agent wariness to [phased rollouts][phased], used for graph fetching ([Cincinnati][cincinnati]).

The following are defaults for each setting:

> - `group` (group label) is set to `default`

Reviewer 2: Any reason not to use the empty string instead?  (A user interface could render it as "(default)") or so?

Author: The empty string is not a valid value. If unset in user configuration, the literal `default` value is sent to the FleetLock backend.

(yes, we could have made that field optional and let the backend auto-bucket clients without an explicit setting, when we defined the protocol. But we didn't foresee strong usecases for that, and now it's a bit late)

> - `node_uuid` (agent ID) is automatically derived from `/etc/machine-id` in an application-specific way

Reviewer 3: When you say application-specific, who is the application here?

It would be useful if `node_uuid` exactly matched the machine id, since other systems like Kubernetes nodes use that as node metadata as well. Saying its "derived from" in an "application-specific" way seems pretty open ended.

Author: The application here is Zincati. The term "application-specific" is lifted from `sd_id128_get_machine_app_specific` [docs](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/sd_id128_get_machine.html#), which is the implementation used under the hood. I should probably add this reference directly in the docpage.

The machine-id is considered confidential and should not be exposed on the network, see https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html.

Reviewer 3: Fair enough. In future, if a protocol implementer needed to associate Zincati identify with nodes I suppose a different mechanism would be needed.

Author: The auto-generated default is meant to be enough to cover a scenario where the network flows are trusted and the node-id does not need to be cross-linked with other inventory systems.
Relaxing the former would need some kind of authN mechanism. 
For the latter, a fragment with `identity.node_uuid = <your_custom_id>` should already be enough to cover that.
